Mustard is a condiment made from the seeds of a mustard plant (white/yellow mustard, Sinapis alba; brown mustard, Brassica juncea; or black mustard, Brassica nigra). The whole, ground, cracked, or bruised mustard seeds are mixed with water, vinegar, lemon juice, wine, or other liquids, salt, and often other flavorings and spices, to create a paste or sauce ranging in color from bright yellow to dark brown. The seed itself has a strong, pungent, and somewhat bitter taste. The taste of mustard condiments ranges from sweet to spicy.

Mustard is commonly paired with meats, vegetables, and cheeses, especially as a condiment for sandwiches, hamburgers, and hot dogs. It is also used as an ingredient in many dressings, glazes, sauces, soups, relishes, and marinades. As a paste or as individual seeds, mustard is used as a condiment in the cuisine of India and Bangladesh, the Mediterranean, northern and southeastern Europe, Asia, the Americas, and Africa, making it one of the most popular and widely used spices and condiments in the world.

The English word "mustard" derives from the Anglo-Norman mustarde and Old French mostarde. The first element is ultimately from Latin mustum ("must", unfermented grape juice)—the condiment was originally prepared by making the ground seeds into a paste with must or verjuice. It was first attested in English in the late 13th century.

The earliest evidence of humans using mustard plants as food dates to the Pre-Pottery Neolithic site of Jerf el Ahmar in Syria. Here ground mustard seeds were part of a "seed cake" dated to between 9224 and 8753 BCE. Mustard was also cultivated in the Indus Valley and used in Africa and China for thousands of years. The Romans were likely the first to experiment with mustard as a condiment, mixing it with unfermented grape juice. A recipe for mustard appears in the Roman cookery book De re coquinaria.

By the 13th century, Dijon, France, had become a center for mustard production, and the first mustard makers appeared on Paris' royal registers in 1292. The town of Tewkesbury in England became well-known for mustard balls, made with ground mustard and horseradish, mentioned even in Shakespeare's King Henry IV, Part II.

Mustard is most often used at the table as a condiment for cold and hot meats. It is also used in dressings, marinades, and as an emulsifier in sauces like Hollandaise. In East Indian cuisine, mustard is used to add flavor to dishes like curries. Mustard can also stabilize oil-and-water mixtures.

Different varieties of mustard offer varying flavors and heat levels, depending on the seed type and preparation method. White mustard seeds (Sinapis alba) are milder, while black mustard (Brassica nigra) and brown mustard (Brassica juncea) seeds are more pungent. The heat of mustard depends on the temperature of the water used in preparation; cold water makes it spicier, while hot water makes it milder.

Mustard oil can be extracted from the seeds, and the flavors of mustard vary due to different compounds like allyl isothiocyanate, which is responsible for its sharp, pungent taste. Mustard condiments also vary based on additional ingredients, such as turmeric for yellow color or vinegar for acidity.

Prepared mustard has a long shelf life due to its antibacterial properties. It can be stored without refrigeration, though it may dry out, separate, or lose flavor over time. The flavors of mustard diminish more slowly when stored in a cool, dark place.

Mustard varieties include American yellow mustard, which is mild and bright yellow from turmeric; spicy brown mustard, which includes coarsely ground seeds and sometimes horseradish; and Dijon mustard, made with white wine instead of vinegar. Other varieties include English mustard, which is very pungent, and French mustard, which is milder and sweeter.

Mustard has also been combined with fruit since the 14th century in Italy, creating fruit mustards like mostarda di frutta. Other mustard types include honey mustard, hot mustard (prepared to enhance mustard's natural heat), hot pepper mustard, and spirit mustards made with distilled alcohol. Whole-grain mustard leaves mustard seeds whole, creating a textured condiment.

A strong mustard can cause a stinging sensation in the mouth and throat. In rare cases, mustard can cause allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis. The European Union requires mustard to be listed as an allergen on food labels.